I sort of know the answer to this question already because you made it kind of
plain, but just for the listeners on the show. The alien races that are
contacted the songs, you portrayed all of these people, civilizations, galaxies
away being destroyed, and then you let Lou and Sue know that. Wouldn't that
cause a futility in their quest, where they're going to unite the earth and go
for the stars, if they know that any civilization, even that advance, is going
to end?
Well, yes and no, I suppose. I mean, that is the existential position of all
people, really, and the time frame we're talking about is millions of years.
And, well, everybody already knows that the lifespan of the universe or the sun
or whatever is finite. You know, I didn't want it to be a pink bunny rabbit
story. And that is why I put that in there. Well, I mean, it kills Harker. He
can't take it. They can. Because they can deal with that existential reality, as
those other civilizations could. Okay. This is sort of a general question. It
refers to Songs from the Stars, but also your other works.
in the way you treat the media I think almost every novel you've read has had
something to do with the media I take it that you would be have an ambivalent
attitude toward the use of the media if it's done properly it's great if it's
used for the wrong kind of power it's bad like Sue for instance uses it to sort
of make a media hype you know where they dress up the Harker as an alien and try
to sell it to the people and so forth in other words If it serves a good
purpose, also like in the electronic democracy in a world between, media is a
good thing if it's used properly. Would that be a... Yeah, well, media is a
powerful tool. It's a very powerful tool. It's the most powerful political tool
ever invented, among other things. And my attitude towards that is the same as
my attitude towards power. Power is morally neutral. The media is morally
neutral. It all depends on what you do with it. people do good things, people do
bad things. Their tools don't do good things or bad things. And this is just a
very, very powerful tool. And so I've written books in which it's used for good,
and I've written books in which it's used for evil.
And I've written books in which it's used for both. And you'd probably say the
same thing about the treatment of science.
It was a tool. And so I've written books which it's used for good, and I've
written books which it's used for evil, and I've written books which it's used
for both. You'd probably say the same thing about the treatment of science. It's
just a tool like the media. Yeah. Maybe that's what's ultimately
wrong, the era of transcendental science, is looking to science as a moral guide
or as a, you know, as a guide for the answer to philosophical or personal or
emotional questions. I don't think science is supposed to be that at all.
Contrary-wise, I don't think that people's emotions or feelings or fears are
very good guides to scientific research either. I think science is there to get
out factual truth and to create instrumentalities of physical power, and that's
what it does. And it's not... Again, it's morally neutral. It's what people do
with it that counts. But if you try to make science into a philosophy, science
itself becomes your philosophy, then you really have an empty philosophy because
science is not designed or meant to deal with moral philosophical questions in
that way. Okay, one episode you had, it was a minor one, but it was in the world
between that impressed me. It's a world between. Oh, I'm sorry, right. In a
world between. You've called this sort of utopia novel already, at least on
Pacifica, the planet. Royce's flying boat, he's out there sailing, first of all,
it looks like a regular sailing boat and it's an idyllic scene in the islands
and the ocean and stuff. And when he has to get back, it becomes a supersonic
flyer in a matter of minutes. Right. That kind of blend of technology in the
clean blue world was, I took that as a meaningful thing. I'm not sure you meant
it that way or not. Well, I meant it that way. I mean, on Pacific,
transportation is aesthetic. In other words, if you're going to have to spend
time traveling, you might as well enjoy it. That's why I hate the 55-mile-an
-hour speed limit. I enjoy driving good cars fast, among other things like that.
Yeah, I don't think that technology that technology is the enemy of a clean,
well-run world, far from it. Again, science is a tool if you understand it
completely. And so many people call themselves ecologists as if it's a
philosophy or a political orientation when it's really a name for a certain
branch of science of which these people know nothing.
And, you know, the only way that you can have an ecologically sound, you know,
soundly managed planet is by having a scientific knowledge of what that takes
and what it is, and by using the necessary technology to have a good human
environment that doesn't conflict with having a good natural environment.
There's much more unanimity among the people who are attacking the new wave as
being a coherent school than there was among people who are being labeled as a
new wave. Okay great yeah that's that's the kind of thing we like to hear the
reading I've been doing of your saying the locus and some writing interviews
you've had and other publications and so forth you seem to be saying that the
separation between science fiction and mainstream is sort of an artificial thing
it's been created by publishers and fans and so forth would that would that be
your position would I be correct in stating it that way Well I would generalize
it more I think to modern American publishing is all categories. Everything is a
category. Science fiction, westerns, bestsellers, literary books, they're all
categorized. There's no such thing as a general novel. Everything is packaged in
a way to look like something. How many times do you see a book that comes out
that says bestseller? The book has just come out, but it's labeled a bestseller
because that's the category. There are many unsuccessful bestsellers, strangers
that may seem, because they use that as a category. It's a book that's, it means
they do a certain kind of package, They promote it a certain kind of way, and
they want a certain kind of book, and that's a bestseller. A great many things
that are called bestsellers flop, so they're not really bestsellers. Same thing
with so-called literary books. Literary books are packaged in a certain way to
appeal to a certain small audience to draw the attention of the people who do
the New York Times book reviews, and that's a genre, too. So it's not something
that's simply been done to science fiction. It's done to every kind of
literature published in the United States today. everything is a category. But
haven't you said, though, that I got the impression in one of your columns that
you felt that science fiction wasn't being treated fairly, say, by the book
reviewers, the people who could... No, it isn't. As a category, it is treated
very unfairly and very cavalierly by the powers that be, which is mainly the New
York Times book review and the New York Review of Books and the so-called New
York Literary Establishment, which really does have a very heavy effect on the
way books are published. These people, for instance, came down on the American
Book Awards, succeeded in getting science fiction knocked out of the American
Book Awards. A real small clique of people in New York City who felt that it was
really bad to have these awards given to things like science fiction, that it
was bad to take it away from a small jury which they could control and have
thousands of people voting for. A very elitist, social fascist bunch of people
who I have absolutely no use for. And I'm sure they have no use for me. Well,
they certainly demonstrated that. I've been mentioned in the New York Times book
review twice. Once when The Iron Dream was a National Book Award recommendee.
And once when I was nominated for an American Book Award, neither of those
books, which I was forced to mention because it was news, was never reviewed in
that rank. And that's kind of the general attitude of these people towards
science fiction. Has a science fiction book or anything close to it ever won or
been nominated for consideration for the award that you know of? Well, a classic
case was at the National Book Award. Leslie Fiedler wanted my book. There were
only three judges to the three-judge panel at that time. Fiedler wanted it
considered for the award, and it was on the initial list because of him. The
other two judges refused to read it because it was science fiction. They refused
to read it. So that's how much chance you have of winning one of those awards in
competition with other... But they actually refused to read it. I didn't find
this out until years later when Fiedler was being interviewed on a Buckley show,
William Buckley show. And to hold this story, I had no idea that that had
happened. But it did happen. Things may be a little bit different now, but
they're probably not. You're talking sort of packaging and categories here, but
you think if this kind of packaging or category approach to literature were
removed, that science fiction would, among, I don't know, scholarly people or
whatever, that it would have a higher reputation? Or it would be equal to
mainstream material? Well, if categories were removed, there wouldn't be any
categories. People would judge books not on what the content is, but how well
it's handled. I mean, if you think about it, it's pretty unlikely to say that
because you're writing about the future or because you're writing about a world
that isn't, or using speculative material, that necessarily all the books that
are written that way are going to be inferior to contemporary novels in terms of
the writing, in terms of how good it is. And if there weren't any categories,
books would be judged on their relative qualities and not on their content. What
about Europe? I understand that you do very well over there, your reputation. Do
they do it differently? I mean, do they categorize that way, too? They do and
they don't. France is my best country, and that's a good example. We're there.
Every book is also categorized. In other words, they have what they call
collections. Every publisher has various collections of novels. They'll have a
science fiction collection. But they'll have a collection of so-called
mainstream novels of something that is the collection of a particular editor who
even has a name on the collection. So this collection reflects this editor's
taste, and it's labeled that way, and it's given a name. So in a sense,
everything is categorized. But there's less approbation between the categories.
Or since everything is categorized under a name chosen by the, you know, to
identify this line, this bunch of books with the editor who is actually editing
them, there's not so much stigma for having a category because everything is
that kind of category. Although everything is categorized, the category is a
little bit more equal. Also, they give you a lot, you know, they have much more
respect. They understand that a lot of everything is crap, but there's no
particular reason why a science fiction novel shouldn't be as good as anything
else. It would still be a science fiction novel if it's that good. And so while
they do still pay attention to categories, they do not automatically discount
something because it's science fiction. I was talking to a friend of mine this
morning. He was over in Europe a few years ago, and he said that he had noticed
many books by you over their translations, but yet he had not read you over here
which implied to me that you must be better known or at least more appreciated I
just came back from three weeks in France doing book publicity in Paris and
publicity for the record I made there and I think not only do I think that I am
more you know relatively more known in France than I am here but I think that
writers in general are more important in France than they are here Writing is
more, literature is more central to the popular culture of France, say, than it
is to the popular culture of the United States in general. People have a
different attitude towards writing and towards writers. There's a certain
generalized American anti-intellectualism anyway. This does not exist in France.
And another European country, this atmosphere of anti-intellectualism. And so
writers in general are considered more important in France, and I'm considered
more important in science fiction. It's a deeper cultural attitude, I think,
that reflects partly the fact that my books are more popular there, partly the
fact that it's more important to be a writer there. Okay, what about on this
question of how it's considered by the public and so forth? Do you think the
movies and television hurt the image of science fiction? I mean, to be treated
as a serious literature.
Okay, what about on this question of science how it's considered by the public
and so forth? Do you think the movies and television hurt the image of science
fiction? I mean, to be treated as a serious literature, do you think they
detract or hurt it? Oh, I don't know. I don't think they, not really. I mean,
the image of science fiction in that respect has been very bad anyway. I don't
think the movies, really add to the image, but I don't think they detract from
it either. If there are some better, more sophisticated movies, they might help.
As it is, it's just kind of neutral publicity, people more aware that it exists.
I think it's positive and it will prove to be positive in the long range because
a lot of people are being introduced to the imagery of science fiction with
which they are unfamiliar through these movies. And if you look at the evolution
in the movies, you find that in the earlier science fiction movies, if you're
going into space or whatever it is and you have to spend like half an hour
sitting to think this is a spaceship it takes off on the earth people float
around it you know you have to to familiarize the audience with all this
unfamiliar imagery now they can just start a movie bang right off in a galaxy
far away boom here's a spaceship Nostromo pow you know in other words the first
half hour of the conventional old time science fiction movie is gone because
people are now familiar with this imagery and I think these movies have brought
a lot of new people into familiarity with these images. They made these images
part of the popular culture. These movies mainly aimed at kids and adolescents.
And years from now, assuming that these people ever read anything, they'll be
ready to read science fiction of a more serious kind, assuming they're ready to
read literature of a more serious kind or whatnot, because they'll be familiar
with the material, familiar with the literature. It won't seem strange and weird
to them because they will have grown up with it. That's why I think magazines,
even magazines like Star-Logs, in that sense will have a long-term positive
impact.
Oh,
I won't. Okay, why did you want the job as president? Why did I want the job as
president? I don't know. That's really a hard question to answer. I don't know.
somebody had to do it because i felt i was the most qualified person to do it at
the time
because i've been involved in the organization from the beginning i've been vice
president i've been the grievance chairman and i've always some time to time
felt that it was going off and wrong in stupid directions and finally i felt
that there were a certain number of things that i could get done in this period
and then this was a time to do it i always felt that we'd be president of things
sooner or later and this just seemed to be the right time to do it jack
williamson had been president and he had dealt with a lot of internal bickering
and things like that which i wasn't interested in dealing with at all i think
one of the flaws of the organization had always been that it was too inward
looking and i wanted to see it more outward looking so we have to jack and dealt
with a good deal of organizational stuff i felt it was a good time for me to
come in and change the emphasis okay could you just tell me a little bit about
what what kind of things would you be interested in doing or changing well not
that that I'm already halfway through getting done is to internationalize it, is
to have an overseas region with an overseas director on our board of directors
because science fiction writing and publishing really isn't...